there ain't nothing wrong with power we
all want it I mean if we don't have
power we can't do anything
right so so let's stop assuming that the
power is always bad
the only question is whether we use
power well or badly justly or unjustly
[Music]
hello everyone
today I have the privilege of conversing
with Professor Nigel bigger
a distinguished British Theologian and
ethicist his controversial book
colonialism a moral Reckoning was
recently published and hit the
non-fiction bestseller list in the UK
it's now available in North America and
English language world we discussed the
ethics of the colonial Enterprise
the reality and falsehood of the idea of
privilege
the purposeful and pointless miseries of
cancel culture
and the separation of good from evil in
the process of historical analysis
so Nigel we're going to talk today about
your book colonialism a moral Reckoning
which is just being released just a few
weeks ago and which as I understand is
doing quite well
um I would like maybe to start with the
story of why it was that you got drawn
into this historical
why you decided to write a history of
this type it's not precisely in your
bailiwick as a as a professor so why
don't you outline the circumstances that
led to to your undertaking this endeavor
yes Jordan
um so I'm I'm a an academic professor of
ethics of Christian ethics
um and so over the years I have been in
the business of
trying to make moral sense and come to
moral judgments about
complicated uh moral issues for example
uh the the
um the moral problem of War
um my first uh my first University
degree and my first love has always been
history so all of my life I've read
history and I've been reading a British
imperial history for 20 30 years
um and so moral questions that
um have been raised by European Colonial
Endeavor around the world especially the
British effort have always interested me
um and so in 2010 15 16 there was a
agitation in Oxford imported from South
Africa to have a statue of Cecil Rhodes
the late 19th century imperialist
uh which which stands over Oxford's High
Street on the back of oriole College
Oxford to have it dismantled because it
was said roads while South Africa's
Hitler as it happens at the time
December 15 I was reading uh the
standard biography of Cecil Rhodes I
thought to myself no that's just not
true
and so in early 2016 I uh published
articles and I I took part in the debate
in the Oxford Union uh opposing the
dismantling of roses statue because what
was being projected on to him just
seemed to me to be untrue so that was my
first as it were public performance on
on this issue and then in 2017
pursue my interest I I launched a
research project here in Oxford called
ethics and Empire with
um a very eminent historian of Empire
globally John Darwin and the aim of the
project was simply to look at how people
across time from ancient China to the
modern period how have they regarded uh
the empires of their day in moral terms
and then finally in late November 2017 I
published an article in the London Times
in which I
um made what I thought was the
completely unobjectionable rather Bland
point that we British
uh we British can find both cores for
shame and pride in our imperial history
and then uh um about uh a few days later
I I published online an account of the
ethics and ethics and Empire project
and uh as my wife and I were waiting at
Heathrow Airport to fly to Germany to
celebrate our wedding anniversary I got
word from the University that a group of
students had published an online
denunciation of me and my project
I thought nothing of it
um four days later three days later
um my historian collaborator adopted
resigned from the project
and then within the space of five days
two more online uh denunciations
appeared one from 58 Oxford colleagues
and the second from about 170 academics
around the world so that was my uh um
inadvertent uh baptism of of fire I
wasn't expecting it
I just uh pursued a research project I
thought was interesting and important
and I published an article saying things
that I thought to be true
the content I've created over the past
year represents some of my best to date
as I've undertaken additional extensive
exploration in today's most challenging
topics and experienced a nice increment
in production quality courtesy of daily
wire plus we all want you to benefit
from the knowledge gained throughout
this adventurous Journey I'm pleased to
let you know that for a limited time
you're invited to access all my content
with a seven day free trial at dailywire
plus this will provide you with full
access to my new In-Depth series on
marriage as well as guidance for
creating a Life vision and my series
exploring the book of Exodus you'll also
find there the complete library of all
my podcasts and lectures I have a
plethora of new content in development
that will be coming soon exclusively on
daily wire plus voices of reason and
resistance are few and far between these
strange days click on the link below if
you want to learn more and thank you for
watching and listening
foreign
[Music]
and that was you said that was in 2017
that all blew up around December 17
that's right
so why did your your collaborator was
that John Darwin who resigned and if it
was why did okay so why did he resign I
mean he had obviously thought through
participating in this project I presume
although you can fill us in that you
were working well together and that he
felt this was a worthwhile project why
and the I mean the fact that he withdrew
obviously made things more difficult for
you at least that's how it looks from
the outside so what happened to Dr
Darwin and and why did he feel compelled
to take this route
well uh Jordan I I don't want to be
liable to Acquisitions of defamation
here so I I want to be cautious
yeah so so what what John what John uh
told me uh that weekend was that he had
pressing personal problems and just felt
he needed to withdraw
um okay so I have some comments about
that so I've talked to about 200 people
now
who've undergone let's say a trial by
fire of the sort that you describe now
it's easy to pillory people who withdraw
in the face of opposition but my
experience has been that most of the
people virtually all of the people that
I know who've been subjected to this
sort of treatment react to it in a
manner that's analogous to either facing
a very protracted lawsuit or divorce or
a very serious illness on their part or
a serious illness on the part of someone
close to them it's devastating Jay about
acharya for example at Stanford he was
raped over the coals for his attitude
toward for his scientific discussion of
the problem of the epidemic response and
his skepticism about the covid lockdown
he lost 35 pounds in three months
and I know other people who've ended up
all devastated sufficiently to receive
psychiatric treatment and who've
withdrawn you know into their own
personal lives who've been abandoned by
their professional colleagues it's
absolutely brutally awful and so it
never surprises me when I hear that
someone has in fact withdrawn when
they've been mobbed because it's a
stunningly effective tactic from the
psychological perspective and you said
Dr Darwin had indicated to you that he
was having trouble in his personal life
at that point as well and obviously
either couldn't tolerate or didn't need
the stress and that's interesting too
you know because lots of people
move forward professionally despite the
fact that they're having all sorts of
trouble right and then if you complicate
that so that moving forward brings with
it a tremendous psychological or
personal cost then you can bring the
whole Enterprise to a shuttering halt
which we seem to be hell-bent on doing
at the moment so I have some sympathy
for Dr Darwin but it put you in a
awkward position because you know your
collaborator had disappeared
I was I was stunned frankly uh and uh I
mean I didn't know what was happening uh
but I was stunned because our
collaboration to that point had been
very uh a very congenial and uh we were
both very happy we launched the project
in July 17 it went very well
and
um
um I was aware there was a connection
between this student protest and John's
sudden abandonment of of the project it
wasn't clear to me what it was he said
there were personal reasons
given the timings that seemed to be less
than the whole story
um I was told by a third party that he
didn't indeed have domestic uh concerns
that were preoccupying him
um but
um later I discovered on on the an
obscure part of the Oxford University
website
uh um a statement by him saying that he
had withdrawn to the project because its
aims had changed
um um I have to say
as far as I can see that wasn't true uh
but uh to to your to your to your points
I mean I think uh I mean my experience
not just with John but with others too
even even some very old good friends was
that
um
one friend described the issue of
colonialism as toxic
and as a consequence
um he was involved in in a research
center I I ran and he also withdrew so
my experience was a feeling as if I'd
suddenly become diseased and people were
stepping back right right
I think that yeah I think that's the
right metaphor you know because I think
the psychological mechanisms that
underlie shunning and isolation are an
extension of
they they describe it as a uh what would
you say as a consequence of the
operation of the behavioral immune
system and people who are shunned are
essentially
treated with contempt and derision as if
they are infectious pathogens now one of
the things I learned for example I read
a book called Hitler's table talk and it
was uh transcripts of his
spontaneous discussions
over meal times over about a three year
period I was very interested in
the psychology of
of contempt and derision and Hitler
never used language that was associated
with fear in relationship to the Jews
you hear this notion that Hitler was
afraid of the Jews but that isn't the
case is that the language he used was
all parasite host language contempt and
derision and it's a much more toxic
emotion to have directed at you than
fear because you destroy things that are
pathogens you burn them out you you show
them no mercy and to be targeted with
derision and disgust as you said you you
end up contaminated it's it's about the
worst thing that can happen to you
socially
yeah I I think uh um in the cases I'm
talking about
I think it was more fear than disgusting
of course I I I've had plenty of
discussion hatred and hostility directed
from other quarters in this case it was
more I mean there you know I've I accept
now there are people out there who
really really really hate what I what I
say and think
and therefore hate me uh you know that I
know that
um but the other phenomenon is of people
who are friends or colleagues who don't
hate you
but but I think that they're more scared
of what uh the way I interpreted is they
step back from you because they're
scared of what other people think of
them if they're associated with you well
they're afraid of becoming the target of
that contempt yes okay it's a catch yes
yes yes the fundamental problem is is
that you become a target of disgust and
contempt and then people are afraid of
being contaminated by that and thrown
into the same absolutely and you know
another problem you had I I presume is
that you you're in some ways you're the
perfect poster boy for the kind of
mobbing that might occur in relationship
to colonialism because while you you're
a professor at Oxford you're a
professional professor of Christian
ethics your Caucasian and you know you
you you are a male yeah well there's
that too that there's that too and so
well so that begs the question you know
it might be that
it's easier for people to believe ill of
you because they might say well Dr
bigger is only justifying the structure
that gave rise to his incredible
privilege his tenured luxury at Oxford
and his and so he's inclined
psychologically to support the the
colonial Enterprise because he's a prime
beneficiary of it so how would you how
do you how have you responded to that
sort of psychological analysis typical
of of the mobbing types right they read
no it's people
that's a really really uh important
point and I thought about this so my
first response is yes you could be right
I mean all of us have uh social and
economic interests right and sometimes
those interests can determine uh uh what
we decided to research on and it can it
can shape the the adjustments we come to
so so yes it's possible that my views in
colonialism are indeed shaped by
um by my private interest of course not
all interests in legitimate but
um it could be that I'm I'm defending my
privilege but of course that goes in my
view that goes for everybody including
my critics uh so in principle yes could
be the case uh so how do you as an
ethicist how do you protect yourself
against that I mean methodologically I
mean it's easier in the scientific
domain at least in principle because
there are strict methods for separating
out personal interest from the facts at
hand even though they're not no 100
reliable but it's a lot harder when
you're investigating history
so I I think government here I speak as
a
not simply as a theoretical ethicist but
as one who
thinks themselves bound to practice a
bit of what he preaches uh I think we
need we need certain virtues I mean I
think one needs to have
a sense of responsibility to be honest
and that means a sense that one is is
morally bound to expose oneself to
criticism
um I'm sure I'm not perfect on that but
I think I
I think I do do that and so in my book
you tell me if I'm I'm wrong
um let Riders aside in my book uh when
I'm coming to a judgment about the
British Empire I I don't shy away from
the really bad bits
uh and insofar as I identify as British
those are painful for me to admit uh but
I do admit them
so I I think um uh what one one response
I have is it is it is possible to be
honest
and it and and there are certain marks
for an honest person that they are
willing to face criticism they're
willing to think about it and sometimes
even willing to concede
um and I have to say uh compared to
my critics as I've experienced them
I do more of that than they do
uh no doubt I've got things to learn
yeah
uh so just go so go back to please go
ahead yeah the the the the the
as it were the tactic
of psychologizing
uh uh people you disagree with and say
well he's only doing that or saying that
he would say that wouldn't be because he
is white and male and privileged
um so one thing I say as well it's
possible in principle uh let's see if it
is the case in practice the other thing
to say is um
it's a dangerous tactic to deploy the
psychology of the of the opposition
because what is it what it allows you
that psychology is to do is to say well
because he's only doing that because
he's white and male and and privileged I
don't have to listen to a damn thing he
says so I immediately exempt myself from
any responsibility to listen to what he
says and to respond to it rationally
giving reasons uh so it kind of
immunizes myself against any
responsibility actually to be honest and
open to the criticism and prison what he
says so I think it's it's a danger
that uh um the psychologizing dismissal
of opposition uh
um allows you to be dishonest
that casual kind of moralizing you know
the only reason you think the way you
are is because you're trying to justify
yourself first of all that cuts both
ways and I think it is worth taking it
seriously you have to examine your own
bias in order to think straight I used
to tell my graduate students to triple
double triple and quadruple check their
statistics and to try to make the
results they obtained go away
because if they were motivated by the
necessity to develop their career to
publish something that wasn't true
number one they would warp the whole
research Enterprise and send other
people chasing a red herring
and number two they could spend the rest
of their life investigating something
that simply didn't exist and then
there's the other complicating issue of
of just being wrong if you're a sensible
thinker and you're a critical thinker
you should subject your own thoughts to
the most intense critical analysis
possible knowing that if you put forward
second grade thoughts you'll act them
out and that will cause you no end of
grief and partly what we're supposed to
do in universities teach people to
subject their own thoughts to a
multiplicity of critical perspective so
that there's nothing left but wheat
right so the chaff disappears and so
when you're when you're writing you said
you take an even-handed approach as much
as possible to the catastrophes and
benefits of the British colonial
Enterprise I mean how do you again how
do you what do you do to try to ensure
that you're
surveying is brought a range of the
evidence as you possibly can you know
knowing your own potential bias
well there are a number of things I mean
um
I mean I I
um teach my students
um the the virtues of of being
scrupulously just to what someone says
in the text and even to be charitable
it's to say before you start to
criticize what they say uh uh construct
it to construe it in the in the
strongest possible form and then then
dismantle it so so I applied that same
thing to myself
um so when I come across material in in
history that I read about that
um is negative about the British Empire
I report it in my book
um so so that there are a number of
pages that deal with
the 150 years worth of uh abundant
involvement in in slave trading slavery
uh in the
um second chapter I think
uh and I I quote descriptions of what
what was done to Slaves who tried to
escape for example it's horrific
um but I so I it's there on the page I
let the reader see it
it's a matter of not just of critical
skills I mean I'm as this is so I'd say
this it's a matter of personal virtue
you have to become the kind of person
who just does this one feels obliged to
do it so that's that right but but yeah
but in terms of my in terms of my own
work on this topic so for example I I
have read
um a number of books on controversial
issues written by the kind of people who
are very hostile to me I've read them
um and on the whole I mean are there a
number of cases in the book I I I I lay
out what they say
and then I take it apart and most of the
time
in my view it falls apart uh but I as I
said the reader can see what I'm doing
exactly and as the reader thinks I'm not
playing fair or I'm cheating in some way
or I'm overlooking something they can
see it
right so they can check so you put
enough of the process of the inquiry
into the work itself so that people can
follow along and double check for
themselves whether you're playing a
straight game absolutely absolutely
right and you you know you pointed to
something that's extremely important I
think in this regard given your position
also as a professor of say Christian
ethics I mean
one of the I've been investigating the
metaphysical presumptions of science
and there are metaphysical presumptions
that have to be accepted before you can
start to operate as a scientist and so
for example you have to believe that
there's a logos or a logic in the
objective world you have to believe that
there is an objective world you have to
believe that that logic is apprehensible
you have to believe that apprehending
that logic is a moral good because
otherwise why would you bother and then
you have to believe that truth in
relationship to that apprehension is the
most important uh orienting principle
those are all metaphysical presumptions
I actually think they're medic physical
presumptions that are derived from
Christianity itself which is why science
emerged in Europe and not elsewhere but
you said know that you have to live your
life in a manner if you're going to tell
the truth when you write you have to
live your life in a manner that
indicates respect for the truth and how
do you how do you justify the claim that
that's what you do do in your life and
why should people take that seriously
that's very germane question given your
you know your position as a professor of
Christian ethics at Oxford right I mean
you Above All In some ways are required
to not only make that case but to walk
to walk the walk
that's a that's a deep question Jordan
um
um so what what's my answer to that
um I think it's first of all to say I
mean
um we human beings our our lives are you
know taken by themselves taken in
isolation our lives are little and
meaningless I mean we come when we go
and you know I mean uh um um unless we
plug ourselves into
some larger narrative
um
um what's what what on Earth is it
matter what I do or say so partly um
um I'd say that if you think of your
life as I do
as as a kind of pilgrimage or an
adventure
and
um um
the the goal is to approximate oneself
to what's good and true and beautiful
you might say God
um uh then in a sense My Little Life in
this place
this time it takes on a larger deeper
significance so I think of myself
I mean I I don't know the truth I know
fragments of the truth
um but I think of myself that the point
of my life
is is to Bear witness in the way that I
can to what I think is true and
worthwhile
um I mean God knows and I mean that
literally God knows Alone
um how anything I say or do or achieve
will last
or what effects it will have I don't
know but here now uh I've I have a
limited task and that's simply to to
Bear witnesses to the truth
uh as I see it that's one thing I'd say
okay oh okay well what was it what was
it in your life do you think that drove
you to conclude that alignment with the
truth was the appropriate way to conduct
yourself because there are alternatives
obviously like uh manipulation and and
and the pursuit of short-term
gratification the use of deception for
example to get what you want and why did
you decide what drove you to decide that
you were going to at least attempt to
align yourself with the truth
that's that's a
it's a yeah it's a it's a really good
question and
um to me it's a bit of a mystery
um I mean I was brought I wasn't brought
up in a Christian household
um I I was attracted to Christianity
um and I think
that has something to do with the
question you're asking so
um I mean for a long I mean I mean I you
know
um
for for a long long time I found myself
fascinated and admiring Oz
um individuals who
stand up for what they believe to be
true and right
uh even though the whole world
turns against them I mean I I know yeah
I'm quite aware that
I seem to have become such a person in
some respects but I remember
um
um age of six seven eight when uh the
the movie
um King of Kings by produced by Cecil
dibby Mill came out in I think 16 1963
uh my father took me to see at the local
uh uh Cinema
and I was so moved by the the story of
Jesus and his crucifixion
uh at the age of seven or eights I came
back home
um was foot to bed and I lay there
staring at the ceiling weeping saying to
God and here here I was praying though
no one taught me to pray uh um
take it off Jesus and put it on me I
mean it's a bit oh it's a bit it's the
best thing to pray for it took the age
of seven or eight so it's a bit
Messianic for that uh for that age so um
so I think somehow the the the idea that
one is
bounds
and you know it is we talk about being
bound or obliged it sounds like a burden
yes it is
but it's also
it's also a fulfillment
and so shortly after that this was I was
talking about age six seven age ten I
mean when I was young I used to steal
um and I remember
an occasion in in I was at a boarding
school the age of I don't know 10 let's
say and I used to steal toy soldiers
from some of my school school mates
and one evening I was doing this again
and I suddenly thought to myself
no this is not satisfying I don't want
to do this I don't want this stuff and I
put it back I never stole again
now I I I I I again why did I do that so
in that case it was a sense of this is
not what I really want
it's not worth so and and uh yes did I
say this to myself well
the phenomenon was no
um something said this to me that and I
I heard it yeah
president Trump recently issued a
warning from his Mar-A-Lago home quote
our currency is crashing and will soon
no longer be the world standard which
will be our greatest defeat frankly in
200 years there are three reasons why
the central banks are dumping the US
dollar inflation deficit spending and
our insurmountable national debt the
fact is there is one asset that has
withstood famine Wars and political and
economic upheaval dating back to
Biblical times gold and you could own it
in a tax sheltered retirement account
with the help of Birch gold that's right
Birch gold will help you convert an
existing Ira or 401K maybe from a
previous employer into an IRA in Gold
the best part you don't pay a penny out
of pocket just text Jordan to 989898 for
your free info kit they'll hold your
hand through the whole process think
about this when currencies fail gold is
a safe haven how much more time does the
Dollar have protect your savings with
gold Birch gold has an A plus rating
with the Better Business Bureau and
thousands of happy customers text Jordan
to 989898 and get your free info kit on
gold again text Jordan to 989898
[Music]
so what makes you so the radical claim
then we'll get to your book but I want
to go into the trustworthiness of its
source let's say and how that might be
established
the radical postmodern slash Neil
Marxist claim is that all claims to
truth are
essentially masks for an underlying
drive to power sort of a demented
nietzsianism and that there's really no
escaping your motivation that and even
if you claim to be as you're claiming
now to be the representative of a higher
truth all that is is a particularly
subtle and Insidious justification of
your underlying motivation and What
Makes You Believe do you think
you touched on it with regard to the
like the external quality of the voice
of conscience say and the emotional
impact that this admiration you had in
the
aftermath of the movie you touched on
this what makes you think that there is
a truth that can be pursued independent
of the subjective striving for dominance
and Power
so
um you quite wrote the new marxists and
the postmodernists say that uh
um it's all about power
what they mean is they're all about
power
yes but you do mean that yes yeah but
but but
the Assumption they're making is
they're all about power and it's wrong
uh uh they're making that because
because they're criticizing the way
The Establishment or the elite uh behave
and and the criticism is based on the
assumption that they the Neo marxists
know the truth and they have it right
which is why they want to dismantle that
power but what's what's missing here is
any sense of self-criticism
um and any kind of self-awareness
because the cynicism is directed
completely uh externally
and uh but but the cynicism with regard
to other people
implies actually uh an oblique
affirmation that there is truth and
there is morality it is that we have it
uh so well that's very that's very
interesting because the other problem
with that so essentially your
observation is that
well the post-modern types especially
with more neo-marx's twist accuse every
system and every other person other than
themselves let's say of being motivated
by nothing but Power
yet they claim that that doesn't apply
to themselves
and they implicitly claim that objection
to the use of power is moral
but they absolutely never as far as I
can tell explain why which is actually
why I was asking you that question it's
like well if it's self-evident that
power is wrong and it's self-evident
that you stand for something other than
the use of power
which is obviously something both
Transcendent because it can unite people
who are United against Power and higher
in that it's morally preferable to power
than exactly what the hell is this and
that post-modernists simultaneously
disavowed the existence of anything like
a unifying meta narrative and they do
that explicitly even though they seem to
have a unifying narrative in their
objection to the use of power but it's
all left implicit it's like an
unconscious God as far as I can tell
it's something like that and so
you elaborated out your relationship to
uh Transcendent truth in the confines of
conscience you said with regards to the
theft but also to the feeling of
admiration that overcame you when you
were six or seven years old when you saw
this particular movie and that's an
interesting observation to me because I
think often that our moral intuition is
grounded in something like admiration
right and that comes upon us it's not
something we create you said that
happened to you when you were six or
seven you you learned that there was
something to admire
and you didn't come from a religious
background and yet you became a
professor of Christian ethics so how did
that unfold across time
just to own this business of admiration
um
um I mean another reason I would give
for saying
uh for for for justifying why I think of
human life
properly as being about
the the acknowledgment and the
approximation
and the calling towards truth goodness
and beauty is that
it makes those who who adopt that
position more beautiful
so so
um that they become you know they they
those who and I think
even post-modernism might agree with
this if they were willing to be
thoughtful
um uh um when you look upon
as it were exemplars
of the
um of the moral position you hold those
who have
risked all for justice or for the truth
um there's a beauty about them that is
fascinating and draws you to them and
that is the question you know yeah I
don't suppose you know cows or slugs
react this way but where's the question
why is the cosmo so constructed that
we're human beings
I really moved by by people who do such
things and sometimes moved to risk all
to risk all to follow them and did it
likewise
um that must that tells us something
really important about the cosmos well
it seems to me
and I think your level of analysis is
correct I think that
it's a truth that's metaphysical and
objective and Theological all at once
that
the proper pathway forward all things
considered is to be found in
establishment of a relationship with the
truth and you might say well that's
because
if you're in accordance with reality you
can dance with reality in a much more
effective manner than if you set
yourself up in opposition to it
and then you might say well that's such
a fundamental truth that we're actually
oriented instinctively to apprehend its
presence when we see it and I think the
reason that heroes in movies and heroes
in literature
I think the idea that the king of kings
that that idea of a king of kings even
emerged is it's the hierarchical
ordering of that which is most admirable
and what you have on the Christian front
is this peculiar Proclamation that
what's most admirable is the union of
what is highest with service to what is
lowest and most and most helpless and
you see that I've been looking for
example at Shepherd imagery in the Old
Testament because the shepherd is a
common Trope for well obviously for
Christ but also David is a shepherd and
Abel is a Shepherd that and a shepherd's
a very interesting character because a
Shepherd back in more archaic times was
a very brave person because
the sheep that he guarded were preyed
upon by vicious Predators lions and
wolves were very common in the Middle
East and Shepherds were often called
upon to defend their flock from very
vicious Predators with very primordial
implements so David for example
obviously used a slingshot which he also
used to kill Giants
and then the shepherd at the same time
has to be the person who despite that
monstrous capacity to kill even wolves
and lions is capable of paying attention
and caring for the most vulnerable
possible creatures in in the shepherd's
story it's obviously Lambs but the idea
that that's the Lost among human beings
or infants is a it's an easy move from
that position and you look at David
Michelangelo's statue of David and you
see this combination of no masculine
capacity to stand firm in the face of
terrible opposition
and this ability to care for what's
vulnerable and it seems to me that
that's that idea is core to the
Christian like the Christian set of
images and stories and it calls out
admiration because it calls to the
instinct to emulate that and that's not
a cognitive it's not exactly a cognitive
process hey it's way deeper than that
yes yes
I became a Christian ethicist
um just just briefly uh to tell you that
um
about I I said My First Love was always
history I studied history at University
in Oxford in the early 70s but um
that period of office of history in this
country in Britain was extremely
Disturbed
um
um my first term in Oxford in October 73
um I I had to learn to drink my tea
without sugar because the the docks were
all closed because the Dockers were on
strike no sugar was coming to the
country I had to learn I had to prepare
for my first set of exams by Canada
light because the power stations were
shut down because the coal miners were
on strike and that was when the violence
in Northern Ireland was at its height so
there was essential sense of national
crisis
and um as a a young Christian
I had decided to become a Christian when
I was 13 and I was now aged 20 or so
1920. I was asking myself
uh what is what have the
um um the theological and moral
resources of Christianity got to say to
this National crisis
and actually uh looking back I I ended
up pursuing
um a career as a professional ethicist
because I wanted to to work out my
answers to those questions
um and so it's a really I became
Christmas partly because I became a
Christian uh but but also because I I
was early
um um
fascinated is too trivial I was
possessed by questions of of right and
wrong and good and bad and particularly
with regard to the political crisis in
in Britain of the 1970s
um in some ways Jordan the book I've
just written in colonialism I feel that
all that I've written that probably is
the book I was born to write
you you use this language of possession
you said and like you insisted upon that
and what what what do you mean by that
and why did you use that terminology
particularly
well again because it's not true that
that the the experience the the the
phenomenons
was not I chose to do X
as with the the the the story of of when
I
finally decided I didn't want to steal
anymore it was a sense that something
came to me that was the experience came
to me and said Nigel you don't really
want to do this and I said no I don't
really want to do this so the sense of
which uh so the word of the talk of
possession being possessed is a more
accurate description of the experience
right right well that seems to me
to be a reflection of the intrinsic
logos of being and it's partly you see
that in science because there are
phenomena that scientists study but
those phenomena are also
those phenomena that call to the
individual scientists right they'd
pursue an interest that makes itself
manifest to them in some ways
independent of their will that that grip
of Interest it manifests itself as the
problems that beset you that will not
let you lie in peace and it manifests
itself as the set of opportunities that
beckon to you you know I don't know if
you know this but the word phenomenon
itself is derived from a Greek root
thanis thigh and it means to shine forth
um there is this yeah that's very
interesting there is this autonomy of
problem and interest that's quite the
mystery you know you if something
bothers you you can't just easily Shake
It Off voluntarily and if an opportunity
compels you forward you can capitalize
that and use it as a source of
motivation and you could object to it
and put it off to one side which is a
big mistake but it's very very difficult
to convince yourself that you're
interested in something that doesn't
call to you
so there is that autonomy right and
that's related to that idea of
possession is that something seizes you
and directs you and you can act in
concert with it or or reject it those
those seem to be your options I was
looking at the story of Jonah the other
day trying to sort it out you know what
it's such an interesting story because
it's very germane to what we're
discussing so
Jonah here's the a call from God and
he's basically called upon to go to a
city Nineveh and tell the people of
Nineveh that they've wandered off the
path and that they're going to be in
serious trouble if they don't get their
act back together
and Jonah being a wise man
just like most professors let's say
decides there's no damn way he's going
to go to a city and tell everyone there
that they're wrong because that's not
going to turn out very well for him
so he decides to get the hell out of
there and jumps on a boat goes in the
opposite direction
and then the storms rise around him
and the sailors conclude that there must
be someone on board who's offended the
gods or God and they go to each person
and inquire and Jonah finally admits
that God told him to stand up and say
what he had to say
to the demented citizens of Nineveh and
he decided he was going to escape
and so the sailors throw him off the
boat at which point the wave cease and
that's pretty and so it's so interesting
psychologically because what it implies
is that if you are called upon to say
something to set things right even at
the social level and you don't the
storms are going to rise around you
and but that isn't all that happens to
Jonah right the next thing that happens
is that this terrible Beast comes up
from the abyss and swallows them and
pulls them all the way to the bottom of
the world it's like the harrowing of
Hell in the Christian story and so the
further inference there is that
if something calls to you to speak the
truth when things are corrupt and you
ignore it not only will the storms rise
around you but you will end up somewhere
so dismal you can hardly possibly
imagine it and I can't help but think
about that in light of the rise of
totalitarian states in the 20th century
because people in totalitarian States
lied to each other and to themselves one
hundred percent of the time and that's
why they ended up in hell
you know when Jonah repents and decides
to go to Nineveh the whale spits him
back up on shore in consequence and
because of that because of he goes there
and tells the truth the God then decides
to not destroy the city and what that
also implies is that if Jonah would have
permanently abandoned his ethical
responsibility to say what he was called
upon to say that an entire city would
have been devastated and that's a hell
of a good lesson for the current times
yes I mean I guess my my
so something that puzzle made I don't
know the answer to it is is
why are some people so made
that they respond to the call I mean you
caught Jonah I'm thinking of a passage
um in the book of The Prophet uh
Jeremiah where the Prophet is is
complaining to God he's saying you know
you give me your word and I speak it and
everyone hates me and and insults me
bloody hell I'm not I'm not gonna do it
anymore he says I'm I'm sulking I'm not
doing it anymore but then he says but
when I do that this thing Burns within
me I cannot hold it in
um so some people like that
um um but there are others who are not
like that who
who somehow
um when the Flack arrives they distant
themselves they they keep themselves
safe I don't know
I I I don't know what the secret is I
mean well I think I think part of it is
I think part of it is the consequence of
a million micro choices
you know there's this old idea that the
blues singers in the U.S had that you
meet the devil at the crossroads and the
crossroads is obviously a choice point
and what I saw happening in universities
is that whenever the faculty were called
on to withstand the
pressures of the administration
especially as the administration became
more and more woke they retreated it was
a micro Retreat yes and so it was a
failure to and and the rationale was
well I don't I don't need to make an
issue out of this
but if you fail to make an issue out of
a million micro catastrophes then it's a
macro catastrophe and you're weak now it
doesn't completely address the question
because you might say
well why do people turn to the right or
the left in the initial stages of that
decision process like in childhood in
principle when you were faced with your
conscience in relationship to stealing
those uh soldiers you could have
continued to steal them right you could
have upped the ante you could have
doubled down like the Pharaoh let's say
and pursued that pathway you know the
classic Christian
response to that is that well we have
free will and whatever that means is our
soul is granted the capacity to freely
choose between
up and down and you know barring a
better explanation that's a pretty good
one otherwise you end up with Notions of
predestination and so forth which yeah
yeah I think there's a mystery there
that we can't completely resolve I
certainly can't we can observe it yeah
no no no so so shall shall we turn to
your to your book itself yes please
all right so there's eight chapters in
the book and you Associated each of the
chapters with a question I thought we
would just go through the chapters and
the question so chapter one is uh well
let's start with the introduction you
already laid out
the opposition to your work that arose
when you started to investigate the
ethical uh uh the ethical pros and cons
of colonialism
um and you decided to undertake a moral
assessment of the British Empire project
you lay that out in the introduction in
chapter one you start with motives good
and bad and the question you put forward
was is was the Imperial endeavor
driven primarily by greed and the lust
to dominate well that's the ultimate in
post-modern questions you might say
Allied in that sense we discussed with
the marxists and so
was the Imperial Endeavor driven
primarily by greed in the lust to
dominate
tell us what what you concluded and why
yes so um the the this phrase the lust
to dominate
is the one that
um Saint Augustine used in the early
400s to describe the Roman Empire that's
why I used it and and uh if if you if
you take
uh um your cue from from Augustine then
that was the kind of essence of of Roman
Empire
um
um so
my so when I came to think about the
history of the British Empire that was
in my mind and
um it seemed to me certainly as far as
the British Empire goes to be completely
inadequate to describe it as as driven
by either the simple lust or dominate uh
or or greed
um
um in fact if you look at the variety of
motives that uh um moved britons to
travel over the world and to take
control of various territories
the reasons are various and I make a
point here that
um no one woke up in London one day and
thought themselves oh uh uh let's go and
conquer the world it was it wasn't like
that it was much more ad hoc in response
to circumstance I mean there may be
Empires where someone wakes up in Berlin
and decides to go and Conquer Eastern
Europe uh but it it wasn't always so and
there may be Empires that are entirely
but lost to dominate maybe you know
Genghis Khan was of that and his his
Mongols were of that kind but uh well
needs to be careful very careful
I think not to import a a kind of
one-fits-all theory and to say well this
was an Empire I said this must have been
like that and a lot of the uh my critics
uh uh they that they're that they're
reading of historical data is kind of
pre-programmed by a theory as to what
Empire must be but if you look at the
history of the British Empire motives I
mean the an early and and persistent
motive was trade uh people the East
India Company went out to India in the
1600s uh to trade and make money
um other people at the same time went
westwards across the Atlantic and
pitched up on the coastal North America
why did they do that uh partly because
they were there to harass
um Spanish shipping bringing gold back
to the Americas to Spain why because
Spain was the dominant Empire in England
was a was a Protestant country at the at
the wrong end of power at that time
ironically the beginnings of English
British Empire in that case were
actually Anti-Imperialist
uh and then but yes then people like you
know uh Francis Drake and Walter Raleigh
are are Keen to find gold in the
Americas and yes they abuse the natives
um but there you've got you've got trade
which I think is innocent you've got
actually a desire to to defend yourself
against overwhelming Imperial power
which could be innocent
philosopher girl that leads you to you
to abuse other people's not so innocent
later on in the 19th century
one reason the British ended up in uh
West Africa and East Africa one reason
was uh lobbying by humanitarians to
suppress uh the the the the trading
slaves so there was a humanitarian
reason
um so the the historical phenomena tell
you there are a variety of motives here
some good some bad
we'd like to thank the sponsor of
today's video bulletproof everyone
bulletproof everyone is a premier
American Body Armor manufacturer and
supplier designed and built for everyday
wear their unique armor systems offer 25
more coverage than standard armor while
maintaining flexibility in all-day
wearability bulletproof everyone's
ultralight armor system is so light and
thin you might just forget you're
wearing it your safety and discretion is
their top concern unless someone puts
their hands on you no one will have any
clue you are protected with bulletproof
everyone you're not a walking billboard
there are no visible logos and no flashy
designs they're comfortable tailor-made
clothing system goes above and beyond
adding additional security by keeping
you Incognito and under the radar worker
Play Bulletproof everyone has got the
perfect armor system to fit your
everyday lifestyle and everyday budget
right now they are giving Dr Jordan
Peterson's listeners a free 3A backpack
with the purchase of any 3A clothing
with code Jordan at checkout go to
bulletproofeveryone.com that's
bulletproof everyone.com promo code
Jordan
okay okay
so we could perhaps assume as a rule of
thumb
that the motivations of our ancestors
were just as complex as our motivations
and then we could assume that the
tendency to Mono maniacally reduce all
motivations to a single motivation is
probably more reflective of the refusal
to think in complex ways than it is and
what would you say a manifestation of
accuracy and diagnosis and so you see I
mean I'm an admirer of Freud in many
ways but he was rather maniacal about
sex and the Marxist types and the
neo-marxists are absolutely monomaniacal
about power they assume that all human
relationships are structured by power
except theirs as we pointed out before
and then they extend that analysis to
the economic and historical domains and
that really does simplify
the Endeavor right it's also interesting
from uh
religious perspective I would say
because the atheist Neil Marxist
post-modernists have elevated power to
the status of a god
and I would say
if the spirit of power is your god
that's about as close to an antichrist
as you could possibly formulate and
that's a very interesting that's a very
interesting phenomenon as well you know
because you might ask well in the
aftermath of the nietzschean death of
God what arises to replace
that
Central unifying tendency let's say
one possibility would be nihilistic
disunity which Nietzsche did
describe as a looming danger but the
other is that another kind of
monotheism will arise
and it's it does seem to me to be very
self-serving because once you have
decided that power is the only
motivation you never have to think about
anything again you can just interpret
everything that happened in terms of
oppression and victimization
and if you're smart you can do that well
you know but that doesn't mean that it's
helpful
yes I I just stick in this issue of
power for a moment Jordan because I
realize in retrospect
uh a major not the articulate theme
running through my my book and in fact
all my recent thinking and writing is
what I would call a certain realism
so just taking the issue of power
um my view is there ain't nothing wrong
with power we all want it I mean if we
don't have power we can't do anything
right so so let's stop assuming that the
power is always bad
the only question is whether we use
power well or badly justly around justly
um and and the the postmodern critics uh
obviously oppose certain kinds of Power
uh but they need to be honest about the
fact that they oppose it because they
they want power for themselves and the
question posed to them is will you use
it well or badly my experience of them
uh insofar as they've uh um criticized
me and and what I think is uh they abuse
power uh um um very
um very broadly and very casually
uh but well if it's the only motivation
then why not use it I always think of it
as self-justification for for use of
compulsion I think we could we could
also distinguish two kinds of Power
there's ability and there's use of
compulsion and you pointed out as one of
the motivations that drove the British
Empire you
pointed out the desire to trade now a
skeptical Marxist would say well there's
no difference between trade and greed
and so you've undermined your own
argument but
if I have something valuable to offer
that you can't produce and vice versa
and we trade in principle we're both
better off I mean that's the classic
free market argument and I don't see
anything at all that reeks of compulsion
in that endeavor
I mean I think you have to be damn
cynical to think that all production and
exchange can be reduced to Mutual
exploitation doesn't account for
productivity right there's no
productivity there so it's a foolish
Theory and so it is I mean greed is
excessive desire for for whatever it is
it's a lust and the question of when we
all everybody I think wants to flourish
we want to profit in some way nothing
wrong with that at all but yes our
desire to flourish and profit can become
excessive when it's at other people's
expense or whether whether it's unjust
um uh so let's let's distinguish the
desire to to profit or flourish from
from greed
well okay and so I would also say we
could point to a natural ethos that
emerges as a consequence of repeated
trade so we're trading repeatedly in
this conversation and hopefully I'm not
dominating and hopefully you're not
dominating and what would happen if one
of us did is that the conversation would
degenerate like if we can exchange
mutually and reciprocally then we can
play a game that's self-sustaining and
that's growing and the same thing
applies on the trade front so I would
say there's a natural limit intrinsic
natural limit to the use of exploitation
in economic exchange because if you do
nothing but exploit your trading partner
the next time you come to trade you're
going to fail yep yeah and and in the
early in the early uh decades centuries
of overseas Colonial endeavor
uh the the British Europeans uh were on
on the weaker vote
um Indian Merchants Indian in fact the
East India Company only got a foothold a
toehold in India because it was granted
them by uh Native Indian uh rulers so at
that point the the British were the
weaker not the stronger
right so that the role of the Mercantile
impulse which is an Impulse for mutually
beneficial trade in the expansion of the
Empire is radically understated by the
Marxist types partly because they don't
distinguish
trade in any other economic Enterprise
from greed and power yeah I think you
know go ahead yeah I I mean let's let me
be honest here and say for example
um in in the use of uh native African
labor in in southern Africa
um and elsewhere in in the British
Empire in the 19th century uh there was
no doubt well it's highly probable and
one needs to to examine each case that
that a native labor was exploited uh
that's to say the terms of their
employment was unfair and they were
forced to do things they didn't want to
do to which my answer is well
um yes I'm sure I'm sure that happened
but it it also happened in Britain
itself and it happens no doubt in in
contemporary India and Nigeria
um so the the exploitation of Labor
through unfair terms and conditions
wasn't it particularly a colonial sin
hmm
so okay so now let's go to chapter two
From Slavery to anti-slavery the
question you posed there was
should we speak of colonialism and
slavery in the same breath as if they
were the same thing now one of the weird
tensions that emerges for me there and
I've tried to think this through clearly
I'm reading out the moment of
multi-volume history of slavery put out
I think by Cambridge University press
and my sense historically and you can
correct me if you think I'm wrong here
is that slavery is a ubiquitous feature
of human societies and the conscious
realization that slavery itself is
intrinsically wrong even in the case
let's say of prisoners of war or debt or
debtors
that was a that that notion emerged with
great difficulty and it manifested
itself most profoundly in the UK
probably in the person of Wilberforce
who and and the Christian Protestant
evangelists who made a very strong case
that slavery itself was intrinsically
immoral and the consequence of that was
at eventually that the British Navy
fought for about 175 years on the high
seas to make slavery a counterproductive
Enterprise and one of the things that
sort of terrifies me about the radical
leftist Enterprise is that they really
risk throwing the baby out with the bath
water because whatever it was that
impelled Wilbur Force and then the
entire UK to stand against slavery is
the only thing we know of in the entire
history of the world that actually did
stand against slavery with any degree of
success so why do you what other cases
do you think can be made that
colonialism and slavery were not the
same thing and why do you think there is
this insistence on the radical left side
to deny the very process that actually
did free slaves insofar as they've
become free in recent times
so Jordan I think
um the identification of colonialism
with slavery is similar
um to the 1619 project in the United
States which identifies the foundations
of the US with fundamentally racist and
therefore fundamentally illegitimate I
think what's happened is that the uh the
the probably through black lives matter
the killing of George Floyd in 2020
Minneapolis black lives matter movement
came across the Atlantic with with uh
no change of clothes landed in in
Britain and our equivalent is to say
contemporary Britain is systemically
racist and the reason was the
symmetically racist is that we continue
to Revere our Colonial past let's say by
having a statute of Cecil Rhodes and as
we all know uh colonialism was
essentially about slavery which was
based on a a a
um a racist view of Africans as
sub-humans so colonialism
equal slavery equals racism and that's
the foundations of Britain and that's
why we have to repudiate our Colonial
Past full ancestral roads
cool down Johnny McDonald in Canada and
somehow therefore we liberate ourselves
from systemic racism and that's that's
the logic behind the colonialism and
slavery Mantra so in this country those
two things are commonly uh uh uh talked
about as if they were the same thing and
my very simple point in that second
chapter is to say wait a moment as
you've just said Jordan
um yes for 150 years some British people
by no means all were involved in slave
trading and profiting from slavery in
the West Indies
but for 1807
uh onwards and then he's 33 first the
slave trade then slavery itself were
abolished by the British and for the
rest of the Empire's existence for
another 150 years roughly the British
were involved in anti-slavery so you
cannot you cannot identify British
colonism with slavery because for the
second half of its life it was
anti-slavery and and yes
um
slavery in one form another and some
forms more were more Humane than others
has been around since virtually the dawn
of time practiced on every continent by
black and brown and red skinned and
yellow-skinned people as well as
white-skinned people the Comanche nation
in the southwest of the US ran what one
historian is called a vast slave economy
in the 1700s
um that the Arabs were involved in
slavery Africans were selling African
slaves to their to the Romans and Arabs
before they ever sold them to Europeans
um so so you know we may
um be dismayed at the fact that so many
Europeans and British people up until
the late 1700s
um accepted this institution and the
fact of of slave trading but we have to
put it in context everyone did it
including including uh slaves who
escaped from from the plantations
Jamaica into the forest of interior some
of them kept slaves of their own so
common was the practice
so yes what happened in the late 1700s
was that for the first time in
in history
um some Nations not just Britain also
Denmark and France came to the view that
only other people as your property
without them having any Rights was
morally a warrant and for the first time
in history uh uh these nations
um eventually led by Britain abolished
the slave trade and slavery and then
Britain used its Imperial power
its power
for humanitarian purposes to abolish
slavery from Brazil across the Atlantic
across Africa India to Malaysia
um so so power can be a good thing and
in that case it was used for
humanitarian purposes the irony here is
Jordan as you suggested just just before
I started speaking the only here is in
that case
um the the Empire and those
humanitarians who were lobbying for the
Imperial power to be used as oppressed
slavery they were the progressive people
of their day
it also seems to me
and you're in a great position to
comment on this
so first of all we have to accept to
some degree that the willingness to use
power and compulsion and to keep slaves
is relatively ubiquitous across the
entire Human family let's say and that
opposition to that emerges with
difficulty and rarely
and then you have to ask yourself what
are the preconditions for that kind of
opposition and certainly the case with
Wilberforce as far as I can tell that he
was driven by the conviction that all
men and women are made in the image of
God and that it was a violation of a
Transcendent ideal that slavery in and
of itself is the violation of a
Transcendent ideal and that is something
that's deeply rooted in the in the
Christian tradition and and deeper than
that I mean there's certainly the
dawning of objection to the notion of
slavery and tyranny in the book of
Exodus that's much older than
Christianity but it's it's still an idea
that emerged with difficulty and I I
have tried to think my way around this
right because I don't like to multiply
unnecessary metaphysical presumptions
but I can't see at all that opposition
to slavery would have emerged the way it
did in Britain if it wouldn't have been
able to draw on a well of metaphysical
and religious presupposition that was
predicated on the idea that each person
has a soul and that that soul
in some manner has a Divine value
yeah yeah so um
you're quite right the the main impulse
for the evolution movement was
uh Christian Evangelical Christian
um and so John Wesley in 1774 uh
published A Treatise called upon
thoughts of slavery and on the front
page of of the treaties
um is a quotation from The Book of
Genesis
where
um is it is it
Kane says something like am I My
Brother's Keeper
uh that God's answer being yes yes you
are and the implication being that that
that all uh human beings regardless of
race and cultural development are
equally children of of the one God and
that was clearly uh the the main
conviction that that drove
um um Evangelical Christians
non-conformist Christians initially uh
to to to found I hadn't yep I didn't
know about that comment by Wesley so
that ties the story of Cain and Abel in
with the opening chapters of of of the
of the earlier parts of Genesis of the
earlier Genesis right so you have the
proposition that human beings are made
in the image of God and you have the
later proposition indicate and Abel
story that that means that you have a
Divine obligation to act in relationship
to others with that
Divine value in mind that's right and so
I know we get we're getting on to
chapter three on Race here at Jordan so
uh this this Christian conviction of the
fundamental basic equality of all human
beings regardless of race
um that that that persists throughout
um the the British Empire uh there was
um um in the second half of the 1800s
the development of a contrary
view uh which you might call a
scientific or biological racism which
holds that you have a hierarchy of races
and the white races are naturally
biologically Superior to uh to non-white
races so you have a kind of permanent
fixed heart racial hierarchy
um um but this this notion of some
people's being naturally inferior
uh um vied with the Christian notion but
never displaced it so for example I was
reading and I caught this in in my book
an account of debates in the parliament
of Canada in the 1880s
and it's reported by the historian that
every time someone would stand up and
say that the Native Americans are
naturally inferior others would stand up
and other MPS would stand up and say no
that's not British that is not
Christians
um yeah
yeah well that's that's an interesting
there's a lot of uh issues there that of
great interest I mean one is that the
white supremacist movement in the late
1800s was grounded in the sun in the
quasi-scientific tradition and not in
the Christian tradition so that's pretty
interesting for those who think that
science by necessity will offer a
morally Superior view to say a
mythologically predicated metaphysics
and the eugenicist movement was a
scientific movement as well and it was
predicated on a misapprehension of
darwinian presumptions and a misuse of
the notion of survival of the fittest
fittest being equated with let's say
most successful and dominant right now
and those concepts are by no means equal
so a scientist would object well they
were bad scientists and you know there's
some truth in that but it's still
interesting that the dominant form of
explicit racism emerged out of the
confines of the scientific community and
not within the confines of the religious
community
and so and so you're the question that
you pose in chapter three which we just
discussed was was the British Empire
essentially racist one of the things
that struck me about Wilberforce and
Wesley this is particularly true in
relationship to India is that even
though by the time they were operating
and agitating against slavery there were
extremely potent economic reasons to
keep
India under the thumb of Britain so to
speak there was still a tremendous
amount of impetus on the moral side to
translate the British Empire into
something like self-government for the
inhabitants of India as rapidly as
possible and that's of course a radical
improvement over the situation that
obtained before the British
occupied India because it wasn't like it
was a
equality a paradise of equality of
opportunity prior to the emergence of of
British power
that's that's right I mean I mean
um as I as I am Frank in the book
um yes the British Empire did contain
um all sorts of uh racial Prejudice
um but my point is it didn't only
contain that it also contained as we've
just discussed uh this this major
movement for the abolition of slavery
and later on in the in the 1800s a
movement a movement of of concern for
the plight of native peoples who were
suffering under the Sudden Impact of
modernity
um based on uh a a racial racially
egalitarian view
um and and also um yes you sometimes you
get britons who are uh dismissive and
contemptuous of native cultures but on
the other hand
um in India for example you have britons
who are fascinated by uh ancient uh
Sanskrit uh Hindu culture who who uh
unlike Indians who are alone the ancient
monuments to disintegrate preserve The
Monuments
um and then you get this very um
uh just in case you think that that
um uh the British imperialists were
constantly imposing their unwanted
culture on native peoples who have this
incident in uh 1829 I think when
um 1923 maybe when the East India
Company it wants to invest in a
um in in building a a Hindu College
devoted to to ancient indigenous
Sanskrit learning
and you have um a progressive Indian
social reformer Roger ramahan Roy who
writes to the governor general and says
look
Sanskrit learning is benighted
what Indians need is exposure to
European science in which Europe has
become preeminent
and just think of that for a moment in
this case
the Brits want to support indigenous
learning
and the Indian says no we need the new
stuff the European stuff
um uh so so
um yes there was racism but there was
also uh respect for and Fascination for
and admiration for Native Native
cultures uh and also yeah well the issue
the question that you posed was it
essentially racist now if it's racist by
by error and by corruption that's very
different than say as you pointed out
the 1619 project which is making the
case that the essential motivation was
both racist and and slave owning let's
say predicated on this need to dominate
an oppress and there's a big difference
between saying that things might
degenerate in that direction even
frequently and saying no that was all it
was that's that essential Mania again
that we were talking about yeah and so
see and another I would say historical
fact that mitigates against the
essentially racist
um accusation is the the Persistence of
the Commonwealth after the empire
abandons its direct political control I
mean you have to ask yourself it's not
as if the Commonwealth is as tight or
effective as it might be but as far as a
loose collection of Nations on the
international front goes the
Commonwealth is pretty damn voluntary in
its structure and also
an aggregation of the countries that
function better on average than almost
all countries in the world and and that
includes India interestingly enough
which is a very very complicated country
and hard to get all moving in a
productive Direction simultaneously yep
yeah just going back to your earlier
point about the kind of um the the
liberal vision of of an Empire that
would as it were relax into independent
states I mean the British learned their
lesson from the American war of
independence in the 1770s and 80s
and
um
in my book I quote
um free Scotsman uh all of whom ended up
governing um cities in India Madras Al
Qatar Bombay in the 1820s and every one
of them can be found uh writing just to
each other or saying to their
subordinates look uh uh we aren't going
to be a forever we British can't rule
here forever all we can hope to do is to
help build decent government uh leave
with Grace and uh Carey we hope the
Goodwill of of Indians and then it from
1860 on 1867 onwards as you as a
Canadian will know when Canada became a
Dominion Canada Australia New Zealand
South Africa all become increasingly
independent and by 1930 they're
virtually independent states
and India is put on the same track uh um
after these the first world war so
um yes yes uh some britons wanted to
cling on to power Imperial power too
long uh but there was also a a kind of
liberal Vision whereby the Empire would
relax into what was being talked about
as a commonwealth of Nations as early as
1916.
hmm
yeah well that it's it's very
interesting to speculate on the motives
for that emergence too it's I mean you
know you don't want to be naive when you
look at the historical record but it
seems to me to be undeniable that a
specially again in the impulse that gave
rise to people like Wesley and
Wilberforce there was this notion of the
universal Dignity of mankind and the
idea that if we could all cooperate
voluntarily towards the highest possible
ends that that would be much preferable
to any state of
preferable in maintenance and
productivity and ethical desirability to
any state that might be imposed by force
yeah so I think there was a positive
convict liberal conviction plus a kind
of wise political recognition that
Britain didn't have the power to impose
itself uh it it lost the war against the
Americans in this early 70s and it
recognized it it it it it it didn't have
the power to to make colonies uh do
exactly what it wanted so it had to had
to negotiate
right well so the cynical view would be
well because Britain couldn't exercise
power it settled for the second best
choice but that's pretty damn cynical
because there are other ways of being
foul and corrupt that don't involve
necessarily the use of direct power and
this is quite interesting that that
India for example still maintains very
positive relationships with with the UK
yeah it does and I I I I myself thinks
that since power is a fact of life and
the other question is whether you use it
badly or or well I think those who
recognize the limits of their power are
wise and many people don't
chapter 4 land settlers and Conquest how
far was the
Empire Endeavor based on the conquest of
land
uh so
um in North America and in Australia
um to some extent in Africa
um yes there was Conquest
um
as an ethicist as a as a a theorist
about just war that doesn't settle the
matter ethically because I have to know
you know what were the reasons for the
conquest but my reading of uh what
happened in North America was that the
English
um uh colonists in the 1600s were pretty
brutal and pretty unscrupulous in taking
lands from native peoples
um but there was a moral Revolution as
we talked about to or the end of the
1700s and uh in Australia I think
certainly Colonial Governors and
officials were they tried very hard uh
to prevent settlers from seizing lands
unjustly from Natives and in the 19 in
the 1800s uh the principle was that you
don't seize territory you negotiate and
you make treaties and uh in 1800s that's
what happened in in Canada so there was
a so when people talk about
you know the British Empires if it was
one thing and when people say well it
was essentially racist or essentially
exploitative or essentially about
Conquest I have to say well
no it was all sorts of things
um and you you've got you've got
um you do have the unjust easier of
territory
um but in the case of India for example
uh that the British never settled there
in large numbers in 1900
um when there were about 300 million
Indians though only about 164 000
britons
um so there wasn't uh there were
conquests in India but again one has to
ask well uh was the use of force in this
case Justified sometimes conquests are
Justified I mean the the Allies
conquered now to Germany in 1945 most of
us would say that was justified so
Conquest is not necessarily wrong
um but there's no doubt that that some
land was taken unjustly from from
natives
um but let's put this in context again
the the mass movement of people and the
trespass on other people's territory uh
uh had been a fact of life throughout
history uh within the North American
continent uh Indian people's uh were in
the business of displacing other Indian
peoples
um
so the the Iroquois I think in the 1600s
uh expanded they had their own if you
like their their own Empire that was
expanding the Zulu in 1820s with Africa
they expanded and pushed other African
peoples off territory and not justifying
that I'm not saying it was good
um I'm just and when the Europeans did
with the British lizard I'm not saying
it was good uh but it happened a lot
because because unlike the world will
happen today we did we didn't have they
didn't have stable states with fixed
boundaries
um uh things were much more fluid and
uncertain
um but it's not the case that the
British Empire was built entirely on
conquest or entirely on the unjust
Caesar of land it depends on the case in
some cases in Canada for example uh the
session of land by native Canadians was
agreed by treaty and partly because
inadvertently Europeans have brought
disease to North America native peoples
had died out in droves and uh um land
that had been occupied was then vacant
and it suited native Canadians uh to to
seed this land that they had no use for
it depends on the case
number five is cultural assimilation and
genocide how did the British Empire
involve genocide I mean this is a taught
issue in Canada because our own prime
minister has basically defined our
country and our culture as intrinsically
genocidal and that's an accusation
that's causing no end of trouble but
nowhere near as much trouble as it's
going to cause and so it's a crucial
issue and so what did you conclude on
that front
so everything depends on how we Define
genocide Jordan uh I think first of all
uh following the
um following what what international law
says about genocide genocide has to be
intentional right
um so if we're talking about the the
mass annihilation of real people
uh uh um my understanding is that no
genocide occurred with the British
Empire not even in Tasmania and I'm not
alone in thinking that there are
Australian historians who also think the
use of the word genocide to discuss to
describe the annihilation of the virtual
annihilation of Tasmanian Aborigines was
was genocide that's not appropriate
um as for Canada why not in Tasmania if
that's the most crucial case that could
obviously be a reasonable place to focus
so why is that inappropriate in the case
of Tasmania because it's quite clear
that the colonial government
sought to protect
Aborigines there was no intention on the
part of the colonial government to
exterminate Aborigines and the evidence
I've read says that even among settlers
yes there were some who were so hostile
to natives they wanted to exterminate
them but that was not a majority opinion
uh so to to describe what happened the
reason to describe the reason the
Aborigines uh were virtually annihilated
not completely uh as uh uh because
because of an intentional campaign to
exterminate them is just not true many
of them of course died because of of of
disease and because of displacement uh
but it was not an intentional campaign
of extermination
in Canada predicated on explicit State
policy no no not at all and and the the
the the state uh did its best to to
prevent uh the abuse of natives by by
settlers the problem was uh as was often
the case with colonial government it was
too weak not too strong I didn't have
the power uh the Manpower or the
resources to stop was what was going on
the frontier which was was wild and
Lawless
right well we should point out as in the
case of slavery that explaining
ethnocentrism isn't actually a problem
the problem is explaining any resistance
to ethnocentrism that's the miracle I
mean human beings have very distinct
in-group propensities and that seems to
characterize us at every level of social
organization and so the probability that
when one group meets another there's
going to be a certain degree of
dehumanization of the other to use the
leftist tropes that's almost certain but
there is that countervailing position
that we've been elaborating which
extends a hand of welcome and an
invitation to trade to people who aren't
part of our particular ethnic group and
that's a non-trivial
modifying Force to the expression of
that desire to dominate and Destroy
absolutely and just just to to
um expand a bit on that
um yes the human propensity to identify
with one group
against another and to feel superior to
the other whether it's football clubs or
um or nations or races or churches or
whatever have you that's a universal
human propensity we all like to do it
because it makes makes us feel bigger
and better
um
um but when you're thinking about what
happened when Europeans encountered
Natives and
uh aboriginals in Australia or Native
Americans or Canadians in North America
you need to Bear two things in mind
first of all
the cultural Gap was vast
I mean Europe at that time was at the
pinpoint of modernity in terms of
technology and science and
weaponry and whatever and that they met
people who in terms of cultural
development
uh were much less developed and so the
cultural Gap was just vast and these
people don't understand each other
and you have weak a government Authority
so there's not much to control your
encounter
um and and so the sense of threat was
high and where people feel insecure they
don't understand each other they don't
have the same Customs uh um conflict is
almost inevitable and it's uncontrolled
and that was tragic
um
um but so when you're thinking about
this encounter between uh different
ethnic groups uh that then the the the
inclination to be uh dismissive and
hostile to another group is intensified
because of those conditions
right yes well and I would also say too
we don't want to underestimate the
degree to which many of the earlier
earliest adventurers on the colonial
Frontier were narrative Wells and
Psychopaths who left their own country
because no one could tolerate them and
so there is a certain heightened
percentage of the worst who left first
because no one could stand them where
they came from and they had the
opportunity to let their sadistic
motivations Run free on the frontier
so yeah so when we talk about
colonialism and I try to avoid the ism
because it implies again something that
was unitary we're talking about
uh Colonial Imperial government London
colonial government in in
um
Ottawa and missionaries and Traders and
uh adventurers
um we're talking about old talk to
different people with different
attitudes and you're right uh the story
in in North America and
Africa uh was sometimes of of
independent private adventurers and part
part of the reason for imposing colonial
government is to try and control the
encounter between Europeans and and
natives in the hope that you that you
might be able to to protect natives
right right well number seven
or number six was free trade investment
exploitation was it the Empire driven
fundamentally by the mode of economic
exploitation I think we've covered that
so let's move to number seven government
legitimacy and nationalism chapter seven
since colonial government was not
Democratic did that make it illegitimate
so what I say about that Jordan is I
mean I think any good government
has to be government for the people
and any government that wants to to
serve the people's interests needs to to
um uh needs to understand what it is
that people need and it needs to be able
to hear from the people so that it forms
policies that serve the people's
interests so there needs to be
communication between the top the bottom
and the top and democracy is is one way
of doing that and it's one way of
holding executive government to to
account but it's not the only way and I
just think it is um it is quite
implausible to suppose that uh
sufficient political Justice only
visited the Earth uh with the birth of
the American Republic in the late uh
1700s early 1800s
um
um so so the fact that a government
isn't Democratic to my mind doesn't make
it illegitimate and mass democracy Mass
democracy uh was only developing in in
the Western World in the 1800s and in
Europe the late 1800s I mean Britain
didn't give the vote equally to men and
women uh until 1928. so if the Empire
wasn't Democratic it was partly because
Britain was only becoming Democratic and
the last thing I'd say about that is
that
um Native people sometimes recognize
that that even the government that isn't
Democratic is good enough so
um in the 1950s and 60s no one knows how
many but there were several million
Chinese who fled the Chinese Mainland
because it was then in a state of civil
war or Anarchy uh where did they flee
they fled into the British colony of
Hong Kong they did it voluntarily not
because Hong Kong was Democratic but
because at least there was the rule of
law and the sufficient stability to
build a decent life
um so your your case essentially is is I
think is that
even if there is a hierarchy of
legitimate government with highly
functional Democratic states being at
the Pinnacle that doesn't mean there's
no differentiation whatsoever between
states that haven't reached that level
of development for one reason or another
and that would exactly well exemplified
in the case of Hong Kong and so it's not
obvious to me at all that Hong Kong was
well served by being returned to the
Chinese Communists for example I mean I
know that was a transition away from
democracy but
people had been voting with their feet
long before that on the inside of the
cover of my book I insisted to be a
photograph of young Chinese student
protesters in Hong Kong uh uh with a
placard saying Hong Kong is British
just to make that point
right right right right well so what do
you think it is that lends a government
legitimacy if it can be legitimate to
some degree outside of the formal
structures of of the kind of democracy
we more or less take for granted now
it's it's because it's it's
um provides just governments and uh just
government means that the the genuine
interests of the people are well served
and the thing about democracy we all
know government can go bad
and democracy liberal democracy is a way
of constraining that it doesn't remove
the possibility even democratic
government can go bad
um but um sometimes without the
Democratic constraints non-democratic
governments can rule justly and that's
why
that's why people are talking about
that's why people if that weren't the
case Chinese people would not have
entered Hong Kong
right right well we could go back to our
early discussion and presume that
non-democratic governments that are
still predicated on the idea that
there's something intrinsically valuable
about each individual and that each
individual is responsible for the
safekeeping and safeguarding of other
individuals that's not a bad step in the
legitimate government Direction
absolutely I do have to go back to to
your biblical Illusions earlier Jordan
of course the in the Hebrew scriptures
the Old Testament uh a common metaphor
for the king
is Shepherd so even back there there's a
notion that a king a good King is a
shepherd of his people and sometimes
sometimes it happened
and he's also subordinate to a higher
authority I mean you even saw that among
the Mesopotamians so this is not in the
judeo-christian line of thinking but the
Mesopotamians regarded their Empire
Emperor
if he was exercising his sovereignty
properly he was an avatar of Marduk and
Marduk had eyes around his head so he
can see in all directions and he could
speak truthfully and magically and so
the Mesopotamians had already figured
out that there was a principle of
legitimate sovereignty and it had
something to do with the ability to pay
attention to everything and to speak
honestly
yeah so this goes back to our earlier
discussion Jordan because yes a good
ruler
is one who recognizes that he is subject
to the requirements of goodness truth
and beauty and you know the human
consciences are aren't always sensitive
but sometimes a ruler's conscience is
sensitive and that's why
um one reasons why I remain a supporter
of the monarchy in Britain because as we
saw the coronation ceremony uh a few
days ago
um the symbol of the head of state
gets on his knees to receive Authority
from above which is given to him and I
think that's a fantastic a really
important political symbol
right well and and it's comprehensible
too when you put it in terms of
something like an aggregation of Virtues
say well
even if you're not explicitly religious
in the classic monotheistic sense you
could say well a good ruler should be
subordinate to the principles of Truth
and Beauty And Justice and courage and
the panoply of more or less universally
recognized virtues and that those are in
some sense rulers above him or her yes
yes
chapter 8 Justified for us and pervasive
violence was the Empire essentially
violent and was its violence pervasively
racist and terroristic
laughs
okay
um first thing to say is all states
depend upon the threat of the use of
violence
um because states are in the business of
um of suppressing
unjust Behavior whether within or
threats from without and unfortunately
in the world we have some people do
abuse others and sometimes they have to
be forced to stop and therefore force
and sometimes violent Force has to be
used so let's recognize that as true of
all states
next thing to do is to recognize that
as I said um in the past whether in
Britain or in in the Britain's colonies
governments in the 17th in 1700s and
1800s were compared to the states we
have now very weak limited resources
and we've got a weak state
the threat of of violence erupting and
the whole system disintegrating is high
and therefore
in Greater insecurity
the greater use of violent force is
morally permissible the only reason that
we in in Canada or the states or in the
West in Europe
and we can afford to be very uh uh um
restrictive in the use of force within
our own territories the only reason we
can afford that is because we're very
strong States and where where we don't
have a lot of violence on the streets
but in the past that wasn't so so
there's that and then then the third
thing to say is um
um whether violence is Justified or not
depends on the circumstances of the case
so I give some instances in that chapter
of Imperial violence that I think was
quite unjustified
um but then I say
um the British Empire was at its most
violent
between 1939-45
during the second World War uh when as
Canadians and Australians and Indians
and Africans well know the British
resistance to Nazi Germany was an
Imperial uh uh effort and between May
1940 and June 1941 Mayhem 40 Franz fell
June 41 Germans uh unwisely invaded
Russia in that period the British Empire
with a sole deception of Greece offered
the only military resistance to the
massively murderous racist regime in
Berlin
uh so yes uh the empire was often
violent sometimes and in that latter
case its violence was well Justified
well let's wrap up on with the
conclusion in the epilogue I mean
one of the things that I've noticed
is that this insistence that our
ancestors let's say were motivated by
nothing but oppression and Power
is
and is perhaps designed to be something
that's profoundly demoralizing to to
Modern people and I think that's
especially true of young men because the
implication is that their ambitions
are nothing but the manifestation of a
sort of narrowly self-centered greed
that they're feeding nothing but
patriarchal oppression at every level of
social organization from Marriage up to
the state itself and that even if they
manage to
and and not only are there Ambitions
manifestations of that patriarchal
oppression say it's also part of a
planetary
a destructive planetary force and that
seems to me to be profoundly
demoralizing if if we lose respect for
our ancestors like a balanced respect I
think we simultaneously lose respect for
our institutions and for ourselves and I
really think that's happening in a
widespread manner at the moment and that
seems to me to be nothing but bad and so
you you wrote your epilogue and your
conclusion
what what did you conclude overall
in terms of what you would hope for and
recommend for the future
go
so just in the conclusion I I craft a
an overall judgment about the British
Empire and I say you know we end up with
and I I list them a list of evils and a
list of goods there's no way we can say
that one outward the other you can't do
it that way I mean how many you know how
many emancipated slaves are worth how
many people killed at Emirates in 19 you
can't do it that way
uh what what you can do and I I see to
demonstrate that is to say that the
empire was not essentially
racist or exploitative or given to
unjustified violence and then Vision
you've got these growing humanitarian
strands in the 1800s and the liberal
political strand whereby the Empire
relaxes into independent states and then
when does the Empire exhaust itself
during the second world war fighting
Nazism which has to say something good
about what it had become so that's how I
uh what's what I conclude about the
Empire
um but to your question about the
present relevance of all this and this
is why I wrote the book it wasn't just
for historical reasons at all it was
because you know I noticed that in in
current uh debate in in the
English-speaking World
um
the focus is entirely uh by the uh by
the um
um post-modernist or anti-colonial
critics they're entirely on European
British Empires the fact that Arabs and
Africans and Native Americans did Empire
the Chinese or the Japanese doesn't
matter it's all about the white Empires
why is that
and uh I read that as uh being because
this is an assault on the record and the
self-confidence of the West
because if it's true that
um our countries Canada Britain
Australia New Zealand if if our
countries were built on racism
exploitation then that surely undermines
our confidence institutions that we've
we've created and is this recipe for and
ourselves and as a recipe for for as it
were year zero Revolution which
generally speaks of humanity very well
so that's why
okay so I see two things driving that
and I'd really like your comments on
this and then maybe we could turn
finally to the issue of critical reviews
of your book
so the first thing I see in that
Enterprise is an attempt to revivify the
Marxist doctrine of Oppression and
victim is that if you can point to the
West as fundamentally exploitative and
the rest of the world say as
fundamentally victimized you breathe new
life into the corpse of Marx and can
maintain that
that mono maniacal fixation on power as
the fundamental motivating uh the
fundamental motivator of humanity but I
see something deeper going on there too
you know and this is a trickier
problem no I've been
writing about the story of Cain and Abel
and
Cain and Abel are of course the first
two real human beings in history because
Adam and Eve were made by God and
they lock themselves in a fratricidal
relationship that degenerates into chaos
as the story progresses and
the fundamental story is envy and
revenge the spirit of bitterness envy
and revenge against the spirit that
prevails as a consequence of making
proper sacrifices
and I see that battle
and I'm not alone in this I mean people
who analyze mythological stories have
noted the Trope of the Hostile Brothers
as a universal Trope for for decades but
it is something like the spirit of envy
against the spirit of productive
generosity and I see the Marxist
Enterprise itself as a manifestation of
that more fundamental resentment and
envy and this as a continuation of a
ideological or religious battle that's
been going on
essentially as long as there's been
human beings it's the attempt by those
who refuse to produce and refuse to
share to tear down and destroy the
accomplishments of those who have done
it to some degree even however badly and
so I'd like your Reflections on those
suppositions if you wouldn't mind yeah
um
having having decided that the the story
that has been put about about
colonialism is historically untrue and
quite unfair
I then asked myself well uh why are
people
going beyond the evidence and the truth
here so the the evidence says
destruction record was Mixed they say it
was all essentially racist Etc what
propels
these people to go beyond
what reason and evidence and the truth
permit
and I I I end up thinking of it maybe as
you do too it's it's not it's a kind of
spiritual thing
um it's it's one speculation is um you
know
we all
like
you know we like to Big up our our
little lives by uh uh uh by um
making ourselves into
the
um
uh knights in shiny armor and and we we
like to put down other people it's a
very human thing and so there's a a bit
of kind of self-aggrandizement here
where I get to be the social justice
Warrior and there's there's the wicked
evil bigger and there's the wicked evil
Peterson and we're gonna smash them it
feels great doesn't it
um so there's a bit of that
going on I think um I think it's also
perhaps a kind of degenerate
Christianity uh in that um
uh you know according to Christianity
it's it's always right to confess our
sins
and uh um uh the self-righteous
ironically the saint is one who knows
just how sinful he really is right and I
I wonder if he doesn't know how sinful
others are that's the thing well it's
really I do think it is an attempt to
acquire and this isn't particularly
original observation but it's an attempt
to acquire unearned moral virtue and
it's a it's a demented messianism and
and it's unearned moral virtue because
the the confession is on behalf of
the group and not the individual it's
like here's how we were wrong and most
of those we wasn't me that was my
ancestors and I'm clearly morally
Superior to them and I've done all the
necessary work of repentance and
Transformations like yeah I don't think
so that that's a lot more difficult than
you might think and and I think it's a
desire to avoid that responsibility and
to adopt the guise of the cloak of
messianism without any of the work
that's driving this in in one of the
most fundamental ways yes and and then
some of these people I mean they you
know they're often they're often white
they're often highly privileged and uh
they presume to speak on behalf of the
oppressed of the world
uh and and and when when some members of
the first of the world with non-white
skins stand up and say um we don't agree
with you I've had
um soon after I got into trouble in in
2017 I I got a an email from um an
Indian uh ethically Indian Britain whom
I've met 10 years before he was a a
medic
and he said to me Nigel I I don't know
if you know but my grandfather
was among those in the jellian wallabug
in Amrita in 1919 when General Dyer
opened fire for six to 15 minutes and
and shot 350 unarmed Indians my
grandfather was among them
uh but he said nevertheless I I think
the British Empire contained good as
well as bad so that there were there was
one of the oppressed speaking to me and
saying on your side
um uh but the the my critics uh they
think they they stand for for the
oppressed there's an odd ironic
patronizing condescending quality to to
the attitude to those they think they
represent
it's also a bit much for me it's like
one of the things I did notice among the
radicals say at Ivy League institutions
in the United States is
not only did they want all the privilege
of being privileged which they certainly
have merely as a consequence of being in
an Ivy League institution but they want
all the privilege and moral Glory of
being oppressed at the same time and
there's a kind of Greek grasping
narcissism and that that's really
overwhelming it's like I see I see what
you want you want everything that goes
along with wealth and power and you want
to have all the virtue whatever that
might be of being associated with
the victimized and oppressed that's too
much that's that's too much that's too
much that's agreed that is bottomless
and it's narcissistic extent
and so I don't see that the discourse uh
I agree so you end up with some people
claiming to to have indigenous Heritage
that it's it's discovered they don't
have at all because I I take it the the
attraction of identifying yourself as a
victim is is certainly political now
because it will it will gain you a a
political points in terms of your career
in terms of your status
um so that there are material you know
one can turn the the the postmodernist
cynicism back on on these postmodernists
and say well actually what are your
interests here
are they legitimate
um yeah yeah
so now here you are you're not being
mobbed horribly as we speak
um you published this contentious book a
few weeks ago
um has the Mob come for you in any
profound and unsettling way and that's
the first question and the second
question is
how has your book been received
critically
okay I'll let's take those two questions
in in turn so
um how's the mob come for me
um
yes uh uh um insofar as
um some of the reviews uh I've received
have been extremely hostile and you know
I confess I took a while to read them
because it was always it's a bit
emotionally taxing to read what some
people say
um
particularly since it it's almost
invariably unfair and and distorted
some very hostile reviews uh one of them
um runs to to 15 000 word uh diatribe
that uh the Journal of Imperial and
Commonwealth history will publish glad
to say that I was invited to write a
response and after getting my lines and
mastering my courage I read through this
stuff and I've written a 14 and a half
thousand word response and uh um with
the exception of three minor points I
don't think it scores uh so my in this
case and in all the others
once I worked my way through the Hostile
responses I emerge feeling stronger
right right so that's a good Doctrine
for life actually if you're trying to
live straight life is that if you do
confront those accusations which is very
unsettling and requires a lot of soul
searching
to the degree that they're unjust and
mere accusation then
you can what when you say you can
fortify yourself in your convictions
yeah I mean uh to be quite awesome I
have learned some things if I were to
write the book again I would change some
things but not big things
um and uh I mean I do
you know I I am open to the possibility
that I'm completely laughed and that I'm
making a huge fool of myself
um but as my consistent experience over
the last
uh five six years since two December
2017 is once I faced the opposition and
look at it and scrutinize it it
I actually think no I'm right as for the
reception of the book
um generally uh tremendous um
it uh it was published in the UK in
second of February uh it went into the
uh Sunday Times newspaper non-fiction
top 10 bestsellers for two weeks
um I was told
um a week or so ago that in the first
three months of its publication here it
had sold just under 24 000 hardback
copies and it was published in Canada in
the US only last week so we get to see
what it does does there so
um the good news Jordan is from my point
of view
um in spite of my critics and in spite
of
um attempts to cancel the book that my
original publisher made
there is evidently
um a a large public appetite for for a
reasonable even-handed thoughtful
consideration of this contentious issue
well that's that's heartening I would
say that
there is an audience for it and that the
audience is large and that this
discussion can proceed and that you can
manage it and still
well and still have your life you know
you can say these things well that's
that's very it is very heartening you
know that that's still a possibility a
real possibility to have it published
and to have it widely appreciated and at
least or widely criticized for that
matter at least available and so now are
you still teaching are you still
teaching full-time at Oxford what what's
no no uh
I'm I'm 67 years old oh unless who's
about 68 now but I I retired at 67 which
was one year earlier than I have to
because in Oxford we still have a
mandatory time of age
um but but I chose I I I'd always
planned to retire at 67
um so I I I'm
yes I finished being a full-time
professor in uh end of September uh last
year but I I did that not because I plan
to to
um
sit on the beach and drink cocktails all
day uh because there are things I want
to do like this uh like writing for the
Press
um and so I wanted to be free to focus
on what I really want to do
and I'm doing it and so and so what's
your next project
uh right now
um I just finished two books back to
back I did did a book on what's wrong
with rights in 2020 and then this book
came out and I'm going to be busy I
think doing this kind of thing having
these kind of conversations on
colonialism I think through to the
Autumn of this year
um I'm I'm not uh uh set up on writing
another book at this point I may write
something on what I've experienced in
the last five years in terms of free
speech and the way in which communities
react to the to people like me uh
reflect on on the Silence of colleagues
um and the way which institutions behave
something along those lines I haven't
decided yet
hmm
all right everyone well we have been
talking today with Professor Nigel
bigger professor of Christian ethics
about his new book colonialism a moral
Reckoning which hit the bestseller list
in the UK and is now widely available in
other uh what in other English-speaking
markets and I presume will be translated
quite widely as the months progress
um thank you everyone
who's watching and listening for
attending to this dialogue and to the
Daily wire plus people for facilitating
the conversation and
adding their level of technical
expertise to the film crew here I'm in
Cyprus today to the film crew here in
Cyprus thank you very much for making
this happen Dr Baker it was good to talk
to you again and uh good luck with the
continued pursuit of your endeavors and
uh congratulations on the publication
and success of the book and no doubt
we'll be in further contact at least I
hope so and it was very good talking
with you today yeah it's a great talking
to you uh Jordan thanks for the
opportunity
and now as you know if you're listening
I'm going to talk to Dr bigger Professor
bigger for another half an hour on the
daily wire plus platform and we'll
discuss some of the elements of his
career and his biography and so if
you're interested in that and I think
you probably should be if you found this
conversation useful consider heading
over to the Daily wire plus platform and
picking up that additional discussion
see you all later
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com